.TH TODO-SQLITE-CLI 1 "2026-05-17" "todo-sqlite-cli 1.5.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
todo-sqlite-cli \- per-project TODO list CLI backed by SQLite
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B todo-sqlite-cli
[\fB\-\-db\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-json\fR]
.I COMMAND
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B todo-sqlite-cli
is a scriptable per-project TODO list backed by SQLite.
It is designed for coding agents (Claude Code and friends), but works equally
well as a plain CLI in shell scripts, CI jobs, and human workflows.
The tool stores tasks in a single SQLite file so state is durable, queryable,
and shareable across multiple repositories.
.PP
Every command supports
.B \-\-json
for machine-readable output and
.B \-\-db
.I PATH
to override database resolution.
On
.BR list " and " export-todo
the JSON output is wrapped:
.IR "{\(dqtasks\(dq: [...]}" .
On
.B export-completed
it is wrapped and grouped by completion date:
.IR "{\(dqcompleted\(dq: [{\(dqdate\(dq: \(dqYYYY-MM-DD\(dq, \(dqtasks\(dq: [...]}, ...]}" .
Single-task commands
.RB ( next ", " add ", " start ", " stop ", " revert ", " done ", " show ", " edit )
emit a bare task object. For streaming-friendly one-object-per-line output on the list/export commands, prefer
.BR "\-\-format ndjson" .
Output is compact-by-default to keep token usage low when an AI agent reads
it back; pass
.B \-\-verbose
or
.B \-\-pretty
on commands that support it for human-readable dumps.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Initialize a new database. Writes a
.I .todo-sqlite-cli
marker file in the current directory unless
.B \-\-db
is given.
.TP
.B add \fITITLE\fR
Add a new task. Prints the new ID. Flags:
.B \-\-details \fITEXT\fR,
.B \-\-tag \fITAG\fR
(repeatable),
.B \-\-priority \fIP\fR
(accepts
.IR 1 \-\- 5 ,
.IR P1 \-\- P5 ,
or
.IR p1 \-\- p5 ;
default
.IR 3 ),
.B \-\-depends-on \fIID\fR
(repeatable),
.B \-\-start
(immediately move to in-progress after adding).
.TP
.B list
List tasks. Default shows active work (in-progress, partial, and pending),
ordered in-progress first, then partial, then pending; within each, by
priority. Flags:
.B \-\-status pending|partial|in-progress|done|rejected|active|all,
.B \-\-tag \fITAG\fR,
.B \-\-limit \fIN\fR,
.B \-\-format table|json|ndjson|markdown
(json wraps in
.IR "{\(dqtasks\(dq: [...]}" ;
ndjson emits one task object per line for streaming/jq pipelines),
.B \-\-since \fIDATE\fR
(YYYY-MM-DD or RFC3339; filters by
.IR created_at ),
.B \-\-ids-only
(print only IDs, one per line in text mode or as a JSON array under
.BR \-\-json ),
.B \-\-verbose
(use heading-per-field markdown).
.TP
.B next
Print the single task to work on next. Returns the oldest in-progress task,
then the oldest unblocked partial task, then the highest-priority unblocked
pending task.
Skips tasks with unmet dependencies.
.TP
.B start \fIID\fR
Move a task to in-progress. If another task is already in-progress, it is
auto-paused to
.B partial
(its
.I started_at
is preserved).
Pass
.B \-\-force
to keep multiple tasks in-progress and to ignore unmet dependencies.
.TP
.B stop \fIID\fR
Move an in-progress task to
.BR partial .
Preserves
.IR started_at .
.TP
.B revert \fIID\fR
Move a task back to pending and clear
.IR started_at .
Useful to discard a start that turned out to be wrong.
.TP
.B done \fIID\fR " [" \-\-rejected ]
Mark a task done. Idempotent \(em calling it on a task already in the
target status does not rewrite
.I completed_at
and exits 0. With
.BR \-\-rejected ,
close the task as
.I rejected
(declined / won't-do) instead of
.IR done :
this records
.I completed_at
but does not unblock tasks that depend on it.
.TP
.B show \fIID\fR
Print task details.
By default, fields holding their default values
.RB ( "Status: pending" ,
.BR "Priority: P3" )
are omitted to keep output terse.
Pass
.B \-\-verbose
to print every field including
.IR created_at .
.B \-\-format text|json|ndjson|markdown
selects the output format
.RI ( text
is the default).
.TP
.B edit \fIID\fR
Edit an existing task. Flags:
.B \-\-title \fITEXT\fR,
.B \-\-details \fITEXT\fR
(replace),
.B \-\-append-details \fITEXT\fR
(append to existing details with a newline separator; mutually exclusive
with
.BR \-\-details
and
.BR \-\-clear-details ),
.B \-\-clear-details,
.B \-\-priority \fIP\fR,
.B \-\-add-tag \fITAG\fR
(repeatable),
.B \-\-rm-tag \fITAG\fR
(repeatable),
.B \-\-add-dep \fIID\fR
(repeatable; rejects cycles),
.B \-\-rm-dep \fIID\fR
(repeatable).
.TP
.B rm \fIID\fR
Delete a task. Cascades to associated tags and dependency edges.
.TP
.B export-completed
Export completed tasks. Default shape is
.IR "{\(dqcompleted\(dq: [{\(dqdate\(dq: \(dqYYYY-MM-DD\(dq, \(dqtasks\(dq: [...]}, ...]}" ,
descending by date, compact.
Flags:
.B \-\-since \fIDATE\fR
(inclusive lower bound on
.IR completed_at ),
.B \-\-until \fIDATE\fR
(exclusive upper bound),
.B \-\-pretty
(indented JSON for human review; ignored when
.BR "\-\-format ndjson" ),
.B \-\-format json|ndjson|markdown
(ndjson emits one task object per line, flat — each task carries its own
.IR completed_at ;
markdown emits a date-grouped checklist).
.TP
.B export-todo
Export active + partial + pending tasks. Flags:
.B \-\-format json|ndjson|markdown
(json wraps in
.IR "{\(dqtasks\(dq: [...]}" ;
ndjson emits one task per line for streaming),
.B \-\-verbose
(heading-per-field markdown; default is terse).
.SH STATUSES
.TP
.B pending
Default state for new tasks.
.TP
.B in-progress
Currently being worked on. Set by
.BR start .
.TP
.B partial
Started, then paused. Set automatically when
.B start
displaces another in-progress task, or explicitly by
.BR stop .
.B started_at
is preserved so the task can be resumed via
.BR start .
.TP
.B done
Completed. Set by
.BR done .
Satisfies dependency edges (unblocks dependents).
.TP
.B rejected
Closed without completing (declined / won't-do). Set by
.BR "done \-\-rejected" .
Records
.B completed_at
like
.BR done ,
but does not satisfy dependency edges, so dependents remain blocked.
.SH DATABASE RESOLUTION
The database path is resolved in this order, with the first match winning:
.IP 1. 4
The
.B \-\-db
.I PATH
flag.
.IP 2. 4
The
.B TODO_SQLITE_CLI_DB
environment variable.
.IP 3. 4
A walk up from the current directory looking for a
.I .todo-sqlite-cli
marker file (first line is the DB path; relative paths resolve against the
marker's directory, exactly like git finds
.IR .git ).
.IP 4. 4
Otherwise the command exits with status 1 and a hint pointing at
.BR "todo-sqlite-cli init" .
.PP
The DB file should not be checked into git; the marker file can be.
Multiple repositories can point at the same DB file by writing the same
absolute path in each repo's
.I .todo-sqlite-cli
marker.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .todo-sqlite-cli
Marker file written by
.BR "todo-sqlite-cli init" .
First line is the path to the database (absolute, or relative to the
marker's directory).
.TP
.I todo-sqlite-cli.db
Default database filename created by
.B init
when no
.B \-\-db
flag is given.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TODO_SQLITE_CLI_DB
If set, used as the database path when no
.B \-\-db
flag is supplied. Overridden by
.B \-\-db
but takes precedence over marker-file resolution.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Initialize a database in the current repo and add the first task:
.RS
.nf
todo-sqlite-cli init
todo-sqlite-cli add "fix login redirect" --tag auth --priority P2
.fi
.RE
.PP
Ask for the next task to work on:
.RS
.nf
todo-sqlite-cli next
.fi
.RE
.PP
Switch to a different task; the previous in-progress task is auto-paused:
.RS
.nf
todo-sqlite-cli start 5
.fi
.RE
.PP
Cheap re-poll for changes between agent turns:
.RS
.nf
todo-sqlite-cli list --ids-only
todo-sqlite-cli list --since 2026-05-07 --json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stream tasks into a pipeline without unwrapping a JSON envelope:
.RS
.nf
todo-sqlite-cli list --format ndjson | jq -c 'select(.priority == 1)'
todo-sqlite-cli export-completed --format ndjson | wc -l
.fi
.RE
.PP
Export the completed log for a date range:
.RS
.nf
todo-sqlite-cli export-completed --since 2026-05-01 --until 2026-06-01
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
User error: bad input, missing database, violated invariant, task not found.
.TP
.B 2
System error: unwritable path, corrupt database, failed migration.
.SH AUTHORS
Brandon Arrendondo <brandon@arrendondo.dev>
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/brandonarrendondo/todo-sqlite-cli/issues
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sqlite3 (1),
.BR git (1)
